[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One mystery of Stonehenge
may have been solved.
What a legend about Merlin the
magician, giants, and magic
could teach us about
history and archaeology.
This is "Gaia News."
Stones used to construct the
first phase of Stonehenge
may have come from
Western Wales,
more than 100 miles away.
And their journey may
have been explained
by a 900-year-old legend.
The so-called
bluestones of Stonehenge
form the inner horseshoe,
not the iconic trilithons
that form the outer circle.
But this interior
area is believed
to be the first section
of Stonehenge, built
about 5,000 years ago.
For some time, experts have
theorized the bluestones
originally came from Wales.
But in a new paper by
archaeologist Mike Parker
Pearson published in
the journal "Antiquity,"
Pearson and his
colleagues proposed
that the stones not
only came from Wales
but from a previously-existing
stone circle at a site
called Waun Mawn
in southwest Wales.
This new information
lends credence
to a 900-year-old legend, that
the bluestones in Stonehenge
came from a stone
circle in Ireland.
At that time, southwest
Wales was considered Ireland.
In the legend, the
circle was dismantled
by Merlin the magician
and rebuilt in England.
In some stories, Giants
may have been involved.
Hugh Newman,
researcher and author
of "Stone Circles" on the
legends surrounding Stonehenge.
>> One of the things that
particularly interests me is
the fact that, if you
look at the legends,
they talk about this very
tall almost giant race who are
involved in building
these sites.
And the tradition is
that giants brought them
over from North Africa
to Killaraus in Ireland,
or potentially Wales.
Then Merlin, thousands
of years later,
transported them on his
own using magical means
to Wilkshire.
You know, you've got to
look at these legends
again and kind of have a
bit of reality to this.
>> The bluestones weigh tons.
How could they have been
transported 5,000 years ago?
>> There's a coastal theory
that they took it to the coast
in Wales, they put it on
boats, went all the way around,
and brought into land on them.
But the tradition states
that Merlin brought them.
And he did it on his own.
So we're looking at
either a technology,
a secret technology, which
would have looked like magic
to the ancient people.
Or he actually was able
to levitate the stones
and control their movement
through magical means.
I kind of go with the
Merlin theory, personally.
>> Could they have used sound
to move the massive stones?
>> There are stories of
using acoustics, using sound.
And this could have vibrated
the stone at such a level
that it could have made
it kind of levitate.
It could have made
it become weightless.
This may have been one of the
techniques combined, I believe,
with the power of the mind.
This is where Merlin comes in.
We know many of these sites were
actually designed acoustically.
So they actually had
acoustic resonance
within the sites
themselves, which would
resonate with the human voice.
That alone could have created
kind of areas of anti-gravity.
>> Whatever means they used
to transport the stones,
why did these ancient
people bring the large,
heavy stones over
such a great distance?
What significance did they hold?
Science and history
writer Andrew Collins.
>> The reason why these stones
might have been brought all
the way from west Wales to
Salisbury Plain to create
Stonehenge goes back to
the idea of the ancestors.
But quite clearly, if these
people living in Wales
decided that they wanted
to change their territory,
to migrate, then clearly, they
wanted to bring the ancestors
with them.
>> This story has been around
for 900 years but not taken
seriously.
Does this prove we should
listen to the legends?
>> Legends themselves are
often dismissed by academics.
But we know that Heinrich
Schliemann, the German explorer
who discovered the
city of Troy, was also
following myths and
legends that led him
to a particular
location which allowed
him to excavate and find the
remains of this fabled city
of the past.
So these legends are crucial in
preserving ancient knowledge.
And we should never,
ever ignore them.
>> Why are we still so
fascinated by Stonehenge?
>> It resonates with people
because, in my opinion,
it's one of the remaining
artifacts of our ancestors.
And we're trying to
grasp, we're trying
to understand
where we came from.
And places like
Stonehenge kind of
give us a glimpse into their
mindset, into, like, brilliance
that they once had.
>> There is so much to discover
and learn about this place.
I don't think the interest in
it is going to go anyway soon.
>> To conclude his
report on this discovery,
archaeologist Mike Parker
Pearson wrote "archaeology
and myth make
awkward companions."
It may be awkward.
But at least in
this case, it seems
to have helped lead
to a new finding.
And perhaps myths,
legends, and folklore
could be the keys to other
discoveries around the world.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."